---
title: BioJava:Tutorial:Simple HMMs with BioJava
---

**by David Huen**

We will now go through the source of one of the examples in the
`demos/dp` directory: `Dice.java` (contributed by Samiul Hasan).

Introduction
------------

The program implements the "occasionally dishonest casino" example used
in the book "Biological Sequence Analysis" by R. Durbin, S. Eddy, A.
Krogh, G. Mitchison.

![The resultant HMM looks like
this.](HMM.png "The resultant HMM looks like this.")

Basically, it conceives a casino with two dice, one fair and one loaded.
The fair die lands on any of its sides equal probability while the
loaded die yields "6" half the time, all the other sides being of equal
probability. These probabilities represent the emission distribution of
the fair die state and the loaded die states respectively.

The casino switches between using the fair die and the loaded die
periodically. When on the fair die, the probability that the next throw
is with the fair die too is 0.95. Similarly, when on the loaded die, the
probability of continuing with it is 0.90. These probabilities yield the
transition distributions of the states.

The HMM as modelled in the code is slightly modified from the above
description with the inclusion of a MagicalState. This state is used to
represent the start and end of the states of the model. The transition
from the MagicalState to the fair die state occurs with a probability of
0.8 while the transition to the loaded die state occurs with a
probability of 0.2. A termination condition was also introduced to allow
transitions from the fair die and loaded die states to the Magical state
with a probability of 0.01.

Code
----

The core of the program is the `createCasino()` method. This creates an
instance of the `MarkovModel` class that implements the model.

      public static MarkovModel createCasino() {
        Symbol[] rolls=new Symbol[6];

        //set up the dice alphabet
        SimpleAlphabet diceAlphabet=new SimpleAlphabet();
        diceAlphabet.setName("DiceAlphabet");

        for(int i=1;i<7;i++) {
          try {
            rolls[i-1]= AlphabetManager.createSymbol((char)('0'+i),""+i,Annotation.EMPTY_ANNOTATION);
            diceAlphabet.addSymbol(rolls[i-1]);
          } catch (Exception e) {
            throw new NestedError(
              e, "Can't create symbols to represent dice rolls"
            );
          }
        }

A `Symbol` array `rolls` is created to hold the symbols generated by
`AlphabetManager` to represent the outcomes of the dice. An alphabet is
also defined over these symbols.

Next, distributions representing the *emission* probabilities of the
fair die and loaded die states are created (named `fairD` and `loadedD`
respectively). The die states themselves are then created as
`SimpleEmissionStates`, `fairS` and `loadedS` respectively.

You will observe an `int` array advance with a single value of 1. In a
single-head HMM like ours, there is only one generated sequence and in
our case, we progress along this sole sequence a single position per
transition in the model. In multihead HMMs, there will be multiple
sequences generated by the HMM and it is possible that the increment
through the different sequences might be different. For example,
single-stepping a protein sequence amounts to an increment of three on
its corresponding DNA sequence.

    int [] advance = { 1 };
    Distribution fairD;
    Distribution loadedD;
    try {
      fairD = DistributionFactory.DEFAULT.createDistribution(diceAlphabet);
      loadedD = DistributionFactory.DEFAULT.createDistribution(diceAlphabet);
    } catch (Exception e) {
      throw new NestedError(e, "Can't create distributions");
    }
    EmissionState fairS = new SimpleEmissionState("fair", Annotation.EMPTY_ANNOTATION, advance, fairD);
    EmissionState loadedS = new SimpleEmissionState("loaded", Annotation.EMPTY_ANNOTATION, advance, loadedD);

The HMM is then created with these states:-

        SimpleMarkovModel casino = new SimpleMarkovModel(1, diceAlphabet, "Casino");
        try {
          casino.addState(fairS);
          casino.addState(loadedS);
        } catch (Exception e) {
          throw new NestedError(e, "Can't add states to model");
        }

Next, we need to model the transitions between the states. We do this
like so:-

        try {
          casino.createTransition(casino.magicalState(),fairS);
          casino.createTransition(casino.magicalState(),loadedS);
          casino.createTransition(fairS,casino.magicalState());
          casino.createTransition(loadedS,casino.magicalState());
          casino.createTransition(fairS,loadedS);
          casino.createTransition(loadedS,fairS);
          casino.createTransition(fairS,fairS);
          casino.createTransition(loadedS,loadedS);
        } catch (Exception e) {
          throw new NestedError(e, "Can't create transitions");
        }

Note the presence of a `MagicalState` that is returned by
`casino.magicalState()`. This is inherent to the `SimpleMarkovModel`
class and does not need to be created by the user.

The emission distributions `fairD` and `loadedD` we set up earlier need
to be initialised. We do that here.

        try {
          for(int i=0;i<rolls.length;i++)   {
            fairD.setWeight(rolls[i],1.0/6.0);
            loadedD.setWeight(rolls[i], 0.1);
          }
          loadedD.setWeight(rolls[5],0.5);
        } catch (Exception e) {
          throw new NestedError(e, "Can't set emission probabilities");
        }

We also need to initialise the transition distributions. Note how this
is done: the transition distribution of each state is requested from the
model with a `getWeights()` and then updated with the required values by
calling the `getWeight()` method of that distribution. It is not
necessary thereafter to call `setWeights()` to pass the distribution for
a state back to the model. This may seem strange but it is done this way
because model object may use unique `Distribution` classes that cannot
be replaced by a generic `Distribution` class for greater internal
efficiency. Every state in the model needs to have its own transition
distribution initialised appropriately.

        //set up transition scores.
        try {
          Distribution dist;

          dist = casino.getWeights(casino.magicalState());
          dist.setWeight(fairS, 0.8);
          dist.setWeight(loadedS, 0.2);

          dist = casino.getWeights(fairS);
          dist.setWeight(loadedS,               0.04);
          dist.setWeight(fairS,                 0.95);
          dist.setWeight(casino.magicalState(), 0.01);

          dist = casino.getWeights(loadedS);
          dist.setWeight(fairS,                 0.09);
          dist.setWeight(loadedS,               0.90);
          dist.setWeight(casino.magicalState(), 0.01);
        } catch (Exception e) {
          throw new NestedError(e, "Can't set transition probabilities");
        }

Having completed constructing the MarkovModel, all that remains is to
return it to the caller.

        return casino;

Using the MarkovModel
---------------------

Having created the MarkovModel, we create the corresponding dynamic
programming object:-

          DP dp=DPFactory.DEFAULT.createDP(casino);

Now, at last, we have something we can use! To generate a sequence of
dice throws with this model, we do:-

          StatePath obs_rolls = dp.generate(300);

          SymbolList roll_sequence = obs_rolls.symbolListForLabel(StatePath.SEQUENCE);

The generate() method generates a path through the model that emits 300
symbols and we turn that path into a SymbolList with the second line.

At this point, it will be worthwhile digressing briefly on the StatePath
object. This object embodies an Alignment of the sequences emitted by
the DP object. In a multihead object, multiple aligned sequences will be
emitted. In our case, only a single sequence is emitted and that is
accessed with the label StatePath.SEQUENCE. That sequence turns out to a
run of dice throws from our occasionally dishonest casino.

Next, we want to test one of the DP algorithms in the DP object. We want
to process the roll\_sequence SymbolList we have just generated and use
the Viterbi method to predict which die each of the throws might have
arisen from.

To do this, we create an array of SymbolLists with only roll\_sequence
in it - ours is a single-head HMM - and apply the Viterbi algorithm
using the the model probabilities (ScoreType.PROBABILITY) for the
computation (you could have also applied the null-model or log-odds
probabilities here). This will yield the state path that has most
support from the model and that state path is the model's prediction of
which die a particular result came from.

          SymbolList[] res_array = {roll_sequence};
          StatePath v = dp.viterbi(res_array, ScoreType.PROBABILITY);

All that remains is to print out the generated sequence and the actual
state path from which it came (ie. which die) and the HMM estimate of
the state path, v, (which is which die a particular throw came from as
estimated by the HMM).

          //print out obs_sequence, output, state symbols.
          for(int i = 1; i <= obs_rolls.length()/60; i++) {
            for(int j=i*60; j

The first two print statements print the generated sequence and the
actual state path by accessing the obs\_rolls StatePath with the
StatePath.SEQUENCE and StatePath.STATES respectively. The predicted
state path comes from the third print block which accesses the v
StatePath.

The output then looks like this:-

    544552213525245666363632432522253566166546666666533666543261
    fffffffffffflllllllllllfffffffffffflllllllllllllllllllffffff
    ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffllllllllllllllllllllffffff

    363546253252546524422555242223224344432423341365415551632161
    ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
    ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff

    144212242323456563652263346116214136666156616666566421456123
    fffffflllfffffffffffffffffffffffflfllllllllllllllllfffffffff
    fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffllllllllllllllllfffffffff

    346313546514332164351242356166641344615135266642261112465663
    ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff
    ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff

The top line is the sequence emitted by our HMM when we made it generate
300 throws. The next is the state from which the throw came (f-fair
l-loaded, these are the first letters of the labels "fair" and "loaded"
we used when creating the SimpleEmissionState objects that represent the
dice). The last is similar but this time from the StatePath v that is
the result of the Viterbi algorithm. The performance is pretty on on
this occasion but it can vary widely!

<Category:Tutorial>
