---
title: Main Page
---

Welcome to BioJava
------------------

See the [BioJava news page](http://biojava.open-bio.org/news) for
BioJava news.

This site is built by the biojava community. We are currently in the
process of moving the old biojava site to this site. Click
[here](Project:ToDo "wikilink") for a todo list.

About BioJava
-------------

BioJava is an [open-source](wp:Open source "wikilink") project dedicated
to providing a [Java](http://www.java.sun.com) framework for processing
biological data. It include objects for manipulating biological
sequences, file parsers, [DAS](http://biodas.org/) client and server
suport, access to [BioSQL](http://www.biosql.org/) and
[Ensembl](http://www.ensembl.org) databases, tools for making sequence
analysis GUIs and powerful analysis and statistical routines including a
dynamic programming toolkit.

Getting BioJava
---------------

BioJava is distributed under the terms of the GNU [Lesser
GPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html). This means that you can use
the libraries without your software being forced under either the LGPL
or [GPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html). LGPL is not GPL.

BioJava releases can be obtained from our
[download](Project:download "wikilink") area. Instructions for
installing the library, and building source releases, can be found on
the [Getting started](Project:GetStarted "wikilink") page.

You can also maintain an up-to-date view of BioJava with
[CVS](http://www.cvs.org/). Additionally, we provide an [anonymous
CVS](http://cvs.biojava.org/) server. If you wish to contribute your
existing code or help maintain part of the BioJava code-base, then we
can supply you with a read/write account. Sign up for the [biojava-dev
mailing list](http://www.biojava.org/mailman/listinfo/biojava-dev) and
post a request for an account.

BioJava 1.5 Release Planning
----------------------------

Planning has begun for a new BioJava release. The [release
plan](Project:1.5ReleasePlan "wikilink") has been drawn up. Soon we will
be asking for a volunteer to be the [Release Czar](Czar "wikilink") to
oversee the coordination of the release.

### New Logo Needed!

The BioJava project needs a new Logo. The sunflower in the top left
corner of this page doesn't really do it justice. If you have artistic
flair then upload you logo to this [page](Project:logo "wikilink").
Everyone feel free to make your comments about which ones you like. At
some as yet undecided point one will become the official
logo. --[Mark](User:Mark "wikilink") 21:21, 1 February 2006 (EST)

Documentation
-------------

### Cookbook

The biojava project maintains a cookbook of examples that help you
perform common tasks and get you started using biojava. The cookbook is
affectionately known as [Biojava in Anger](BioJava:Cookbook "wikilink").
A [French version](BioJava:CookbookFrench "wikilink") is also available.

### API Documentation (JavaDocs)

The following are links to API documentation autogenerated by javadoc.

-   [API docs (BioJava version
    1.3)](http://www.biojava.org/docs/api/index.html)
-   [API docs (BioJava version
    1.4)](http://www.biojava.org/docs/api14/index.html)

### BioJava Tutorial

The BioJava tutorial is [here](BioJava:Tutorial "wikilink")

Thanks
------

The [open-bio](http://www.open-bio.org/) servers reside in Cambridge,
Massachusetts USA with colocation facilities and internet bandwidth
donated by [Wyeth](http://www.wyeth.com/) Research. We would like to
thank Chris Dagdigian from [The Bioteam](http://www.bioteam.net/) for
maintaining the bio\* servers.

Please see [documentation on customizing the
interface](http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_i18n) and the
[User's Guide](http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_User%27s_Guide)
for usage and configuration help.
