---
title: Sylvain Foisy
---

My name is Sylvain Foisy and I am a project manager for the [Réseau
québécois de bio-informatique](http://www.bioneq.qc.ca) (also known as
BioneQ) in Montréal, Québec, Canada. BioneQ is the bioinformatics
service component of the [Robert-Cedergren Bioinformatics
Center](http://www.centrerc.umontreal.ca) of the [Université de
Montréal](http://www.umontreal.ca). My expertise in mainly Biology since
I have a Ph. D. in molecular biology and too many years as a post-doc
;-). I am interested into creating new BioJava material dealing with
protein structure and function.

I first became interested in BioJava when converting from a benchworking
biologist to a bio-informatician, turning a certain love of the machine
from a hobby to a full-blown career. Having to learn a programming
language and not having a lot of time to do so, I chose Java because it
works well with my brain and they don't teach Perl around here! Jocking
aside, my main contribution so far had been in creating useful docs to
go with the API for example in translating BioJava in anger to french
and to put some more docs into the Javadocs. I admit that I am a plain
user, not a programmer but I have taken the evangelist's stick around
here to do some PR. I organized a 1-week BioJava BootCamp in Montreal in
2003 and a BioJava BOF at ISMB2004 in Glasgow. Funding allowing, I'll
try to organize a new BootCamp in 2007.

While not doing bio-informatics, I am also a biology instructor in a
junior college in Montreal, a Mac guru and enjoy whisky and suhis.

<Category:People>
