---
title: Dickson Guedes
---

Dickson S. Guedes
-----------------

I was born in [Laguna](wp:Laguna (Santa Catarina) "wikilink") but now I
live in Tubar√£o, [Santa Catarina](wp:Santa Catarina (state) "wikilink"),
[Brazil](wp:Brazil "wikilink") and work in
[UNISUL](http://www.unisul.br) - a local University of [Santa
Catarina](wp:Santa Catarina (state) "wikilink").

I've contributed with BioJava by porting the
[CookBook's](Biojava:Cookbook "wikilink") English version to this Wiki,
but I've introduced to BioJava at 2005, when I've started my Bacharel's
thesis using it how a framework to contruct [Phylogenetic
trees](wp:Phylogenetic trees "wikilink") "powered by" [Genetic
algorithms](wp:Genetic algorithms "wikilink"). So... if all dones right,
I'll presents my tesis at July of 2006... good luck for me.. ":)

### My monografy

**A WEB system to construct philogenetics trees from DNA sequences using
Genetic Algorithms**

*A common process in Phylogenetic Systematics is the construction of
cladograms - also known as Phylogenetic trees -, which represent the
relation of similarity between the studied species, based on different
criteria of evaluation. So, nowadays the use of computational tools is
very common to consider the DNA sequences as an evaluation criteria, to
return a set of consistent information, based on systematic methods that
make use of mathematical resources in order to express relations between
species in a model. This research demonstrates how was possible to
develop a genetic algorithm with a BLOSUM62 substitution matrix to
obtain satisfactory results represented in a phylogenetic tree,
expressing similarity relations between the input sequences.*

**Key words**: Bioinformatics, Genetics, Phylogeny, Phylogenetic Trees,
Genetic Algorithms

<Category:People>
