---
title: Google Summer of Code 2012
---

Introduction
------------

The Open Bioinformatics foundation is [participating again in this
year's Google Summer of
Code](http://www.open-bio.org/wiki/Google_Summer_of_Code).

We are accepting applicants for projects for BioJava. If you want to
propose a project, have a look at the <BioJava:Modules> page, for areas
which are currently under development. Also take a look at the [Feature
Requests](BioJava3_Feature_Requests "wikilink") page.

Please read the [GSoC page at the Open Bioinformatics
Foundation](http://www.open-bio.org/wiki/Google_Summer_of_Code) and the
[main Google Summer of Code page](http://code.google.com/soc) for more
details about the program.

### Project Proposals

#### New File Parsers for BioJava

In the ideal word one would like to import the data from one program
directly into another without having to do any file parsing,
unfortunately in the real life this is not the case. Furthermore, having
access to a wide variety of the file parsers is a prerequisite for any
real work with the data. At least this is often the case in
Bioinformatics.

Yet, writing the file parsers is a tedious job that has to be done with
care and consideration to achieve reliability and performance. So it is
best to be done as a main task rather the afterthought of some other
process. So if you want to help us to improve BioJava and spare users
from a lot of complicate work choose this project! There is plenty of
scope for multi-threaded programming, advanced IO and complicated data
structures to choose from, all depends on what you want.

- UniProt

- [HMMER 3](http://hmmer.janelia.org)

- [Phylip](http://evolution.genetics.washington.edu/phylip.html)

- [MrBayes](http://mrbayes.sourceforge.net)

- Genbank (using XML format as input and one of the standard Java XML
parsers with the aim to provide and example for people that is easy to
follow)

- Tidy up existing parsers in BioJava, namely FASTA and FASTQ parsers

#### Take BioJava into the Cloud

- Hadoop-ify some of the BioJava modules

#### Port an Algorithm to Java

- Blast

- Hmmer

Previous Years
--------------

[Google Summer of Code 2011](Google Summer of Code 2011 "wikilink")

[Google Summer of Code 2010](Google Summer of Code 2010 "wikilink")
