---
title: Main Page
---

Welcome to BioJava
------------------

See the [BioJava news page](http://biojava.open-bio.org/news) for
BioJava news.

About BioJava
-------------

BioJava is an [open-sourceproject](wp:Open-Source "wikilink") dedicated
to providing a [Java](http://www.java.sun.com) framework for processing
biological data. It include objects for manipulating biological
sequences, file parsers, [DAS](http://biodas.org/) client and server
suport, access to [BioSQL](http://www.biosql.org/) and
[Ensembl](http://www.ensembl.org) databases, tools for making sequence
analysis GUIs and powerful analysis and statistical routines including a
dynamic programming toolkit.

Getting BioJava
---------------

BioJava is distributed under the terms of the GNU [Lesser
GPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html). This means that you can use
the libraries without your software being forced under either the LGPL
or [GPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html). LGPL is not GPL.

BioJava releases can be obtained from our download area. Instructions
for installing the library, and building source releases, can be found
on the Getting started page.

You can also maintain an up-to-date view of BioJava with
[CVS](http://www.cvs.org/). We provide anonymous
[CVS](wp:Concurrent Versions System "wikilink") server. If you wish to
contribute your existing code or help maintain part of the BioJava
code-base, then we can supply you with a read/write account. Sign up for
the biojava-dev mailing list and post a request for an account.

Thanks
------

The [open-bio](http://www.open-bio.org/) servers reside in Cambridge,
Massachusetts USA with colocation facilities and internet bandwidth
donated by [Wyeth](http://www.wyeth.com/) Research. We would like to
thank Chris Dagdigian from [The Bioteam](http://www.bioteam.net/) for
maintaining the bio\* servers.

Please see [documentation on customizing the
interface](http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_i18n) and the
[User's Guide](http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_User%27s_Guide)
for usage and configuration help.
