---
title: Mark Schreiber
---

I first became involved with BioJava in 2000. I was doing my PhD in [New
Zealand](wp:New Zealand "wikilink") and I needed a Java package that
could produce HMMs suitable for gene finding algorithms. BioJava had
just arrived and did what I needed it to do. During this time I added
some support for circular genome sequences and locations, much of the
DistributionTools class, tools to read Phred data and improved the
serialization of the core BioJava objects. Some of these contributions
have been more succesful than others. I also used BioJava in my PhD
research to calculate the information content of motifs and display
these graphically.

In 2001 I joined [AgResearch](http://www.agresearch.co.nz/), an NZ based
agricultural biotech company, as a Bioinformatics Consultant. There I
used BioJava to detect SNPs and micro-satellites in EST contigs. While
at AgResearch in 2003 I began work on the Biojava in Anger cookbook
which I still try to keep up to date when I have time.

In 2004 I moved to [Singapore](wp:Singapore "wikilink") to work as a
Principal Scientist with the [Novartis Institute for Tropical
Diseases](http://www.nitd.novartis.com/). Here I use BioJava to support
the [Tuberculosis](wp:Tuberculosis "wikilink") and [Dengue
Fever](wp:Dengue Fever "wikilink") drug discovery programs. My research
interests have expanded to include evolution, phylogeny and molecular
and structural modelling. Some of these may find there way into BioJava
soon. I am also working with [Richard Holland](User:Rholland "wikilink")
from [GIS](http://www.gis.a-star.edu.sg/) using biojava and biosql to
make a dengue virus sequence database called
[dengueinfo](http://www.dengueinfo.org/). We are also working on an
experimental extension and hopefully backwards compatable upgrade to
biojava called biojavax (watch this space).

I am sporadically helping to write a book on BioJava with a projected
completion date that is very fuzzy just now. My current thinking is that
I will make it a Wiki manual or a DocBook xml in CVS so everyone can
edit it.

<Category:People>
