---
title: Sylvain Foisy
tags:
 - People
---

My name is Sylvain Foisy and I am a project manager for the [Laboratory
in Genetics and Genomic Medicine of
Inflammation](http://www.inflammgen.org) located in the Montréal Heart
Institute in Montréal, Québec, Canada. My expertise is mainly Biology
since I have a Ph. D. in molecular biology and too many years as a
post-doc ;-). I am interested into creating new BioJava material dealing
with protein structure and function.

I first became interested in BioJava when converting from a benchworking
biologist to a bio-informatician, turning a certain love of the machine
from a hobby to a full-blown career. Having to learn a programming
language and not having a lot of time to do so, I chose Java because it
works well with my brain and they don't teach Perl around here! Jokeing
aside, my main contribution so far had been in creating useful docs to
go with the API for example in translating [BioJava in anger in
french](/wikis/BioJava:CookbookFrench "wikilink") and to put some more docs
into the Javadocs. I admit that I am a plain user, not a programmer but
I have taken the evangelist's stick around here to do some PR. I
organized a 1-week BioJava BootCamp in Montreal in 2003 and a BioJava
BOF at ISMB2004 in Glasgow. Funding allowing, I'll try to organize a new
BootCamp in 2008.

While not doing bio-informatics, I am also a biology instructor in a
junior college in Montreal, a Mac guru and enjoy whisky and suhis.
